blog: how reliable is your distributed database (#1435)
questdb/questdb.io: blog/2023-03-03-How reliable is your distributed database.mdx

than just a database. Postgres is also an extensible platform where you can, for
example, add a geographical location column type, a geospatial SQL Query syntax,
and indexes, effectively turning it into GIS system. Similarly, TimescaleDB is a PostgreSQL
extension built to optimize the storage and query performance of time-series
workloads.

Out of the Postgres box, TimescaleDB inherits its replication functionality.
PostgreSQL supports multiple read-only replicas with Sync or Async replication
with all the ACID and Transaction Isolation properties [and so does
Timescale](https://docs.timescale.com/timescaledb/latest/how-to-guides/replication-and-ha/).

Unfortunately, automatic failover is solved neither by PostgreSQL nor
TimescaleDB, but there are 3rd party solutions like
[Patroni](https://github.com/zalando/patroni) that add support for that functionality. PostgreSQL describes the process
[of failover as STONITH (Shoot The Other Node In The
Head)](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/15/warm-standby-failover.html) meaning
that the primary node has to be shot down once it starts to misbehave.

Running Sync replication can solve the data gaps and duplicate problems after

> the failover. If the application detects the failover it can re-run the last

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the failover. If the application detects the failover, it can re-run the last
```

---

> title: How Reliable is Your Distributed Database?

Reviewer 2: Maybe:
```suggestion
title: A Ride to Database Replication: Making Distributed Databases More Reliable
```

Author: I don't see this as a clear winner. It's quite long, a bit boring, and does not reflect what the article is about.

author: Alex Pelagenko
author_title: QuestDB team
author_url: https://github.com/ideoma
author_image_url: https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/ideoma
description: Comparion of replication options of time-series databases.
keywords:
  - replication
  - failover
  - Write Ahead Log
  - comparison
image: /img/blog/2023-03-03/database replication.svg
tags: [
  replication, 
  comparison,
  engineering
]

> slug: how-reliable-your-distributed-database

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
slug: replication-questdb-influxdb-clickhouse
```

Author: Nowadays search engines are probably clever to not look at this, this is only for people. People will appreciate when the URL matches the title.

---

> A brief analysis of what can go wrong with databases and how different
> Time-series databases can solve common writing failover scenario with
> replication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A brief analysis of what can go wrong with databases and how different
time-series databases can use replication to solve common write failover scenarios.
```

<!--truncate-->

## Failover

Last year, I started to commute to the office since the pandemic loosened its
grip on London life. To beat the traffic and unreliable (as well as expensive!)
trains, I bought a quality electric bicycle from a famous Swiss-American brand.
It's a well-thought-out device; sometimes I even want to call it a gadget!
Despite how enjoyable it is, in the last 6 months, I've had to go to the bike
repair shop to fix quite a few things. There were some gearbox glitches (yes, it
has a gearbox), the electrical wiring to the backlight needed fixing (which
actually stopped the bike from running), and also some trivial maintenance like

> cut tire, brake pads replacements, and finally, the diving belt snapped (it has

Reviewer: ```suggestion
flat tire, brake pad replacement, and a snapped drive belt (it has
```

Author: A flat tire is not a big problem, the cut tire is.

> a belt instead of the chain). Electric bikes are hot at the moment, but not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a belt instead of the chain) needed to be performed. Electric bikes are hot at the moment, but not
```

Author: Same as above I don't see it being any better and it changes the meaining

Reviewer 2: The whole sentence:

There were some gearbox glitches (yes, it
has a gearbox), the electrical wiring to the backlight needed fixing (which
actually stopped the bike from running), and also some trivial maintenance like cut tire, brake pads replacements, and finally, the diving belt snapped (it has a belt instead of the chain).

I think @sklarsa meant:

There were some gearbox glitches (yes, it
has a gearbox), the electrical wiring to the backlight needed fixing (which
actually stopped the bike from running), and also some trivial maintenance like cut tire, brake pads replacements **needed to be performed** and finally, the diving belt snapped (it has a belt instead of the chain).

I think it is better to split it:

There were some gearbox glitches (yes, it
has a gearbox), the electrical wiring to the backlight needed fixing (which
actually stopped the bike from running), and also some trivial maintenance like cut tire, brake pads replacements **needed to be performed**. **Finally**, the diving belt snapped (it has a belt instead of **a** chain).

Also, after some googling, I think it should be a driving belt instead of a diving belt?

Author: Definitely driving belt!

Author: I rewrote these sentences in a slightly different way. Sorry, I don't like how "needed to be performed" sounds

mainstream yet, and annoyingly it takes a few days or even weeks for the
replacement parts to come in.

import Banner from "@theme/Banner"

<Banner
  alt="commute failover problem"
  height={439}
  src="/img/blog/2023-03-03/electric_bike.jpeg"
  width={650}
>Commute failover problem</Banner>

> I like the bike when it works, but on its bad days I cannot help but think that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I like the bike when it works, but on its bad days, I cannot help but think that
```

I have a strong case for redundancy. What if I had another bike to ride while my
current one is being fixed? That would definitely help.

> In some sense, databases are like bicycles. Sometimes you ride them, but other

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a sense, databases are like bicycles. Sometimes you ride them, but other
```

> times they can have a bad day. Fortunately, databases are much more reliable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
times they can have a break down. Fortunately, databases are much more reliable
```

Author: A bad day is more informal, I like to keep the style to be simple

> than my commuting piece of art but there are still rough edges. For example, if

Reviewer: ```suggestion
than my commuting piece of art, but there are still some rough edges around reliability and redundancy. For example, if
```

Author: They are not perfect in a general sense, not only re reliability.

> database hardware breaks down, there is an option to recover it from a backup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
database hardware fails, there is an option to recover your data from a backup.
```

But that would be comparable to going to the shop to buy a new bike every time
it breaks. Even if a new bike was reasonably cheap, it would still take time to

> buy and set up; similar to how restoring DB backups also comes along with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
buy and set up; similar to how restoring a DB backup can also come along with
```

downtime. Ideally, I'd want to have a second bike ready to go as a hot backup,
or in database terms, I'd want to have a replicated database node to switch to
in case of a failure.

> Time series databases are designed to be writing data constantly, and one of the

Reviewer: Maybe add a subheader here, since you're shifting from bikes to databases?

Author: I think it still belongs to Failover subheader

basic use cases of any time series database is to support nonstop writing. Using
my bike analogy, if I had a device on my bicycle to record my trip with very
high precision, saving the location multiple times per second, that would be

> somewhat similar to this requirement. And in the ideal world, if the bike breaks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
somewhat similar to this requirement. And in an ideal world, if the bike breaks
```

down, I could just switch to a spare right on the spot, in the middle of the
road, and continue my journey along with all of my trip data saved without
delay.

A similar scenario is when an application writes to a database. When it sends
inserts to a table and then suddenly gets a network disconnect, the application
should switch to a replicated node and continue inserting.

So if I had an application `App` writing to DB `Node 1` with replica DB `Node 2`

> I could draw the use case as a sequence diagram:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I could draw this scenario as a sequence diagram:
```

<Banner
  alt="Write failover use case"
  src="/img/blog/2023-03-03/Write failover sequence diagram.png"
  width={531}
>Write failover use case</Banner>

Seems straightforward, but is it easy to get a database to play its part in this
dance? I believe it's not. To achieve this, the database has to be able to write
data into the same table A through multiple nodes. 

> In the general case, the database also has to evolve the schema to support

Author: I like "schema evolution" more. It's also a common term https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Schema_evolution

> Write data to the same table using multiple DB Nodes
> ([multi-master replication](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multi-master_replication))

> > or mirror the data to a read-only replicated node with automatic failover

Reviewer 2: I still find this block quote out-of-place: it is not introduced by another sentence and it is written in imperative.

Author: OK, what do you suggest to do instead, please? I want these points to stand out from paragraph text

Reviewer 2: I did propose this - https://github.com/questdb/questdb.io/pull/1435#discussion_r1127643339

Author: ok, accepted

order).

In summary, a database needs to be able to:

- Write data to the same table using multiple DB Nodes
([multi-master replication](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multi-master_replication))

> or mirror the data to a read-only replicated node with automatic failover

Author: Good question, but I didn't find any dedicated wiki about that. It's described in the mainstream replication article https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Replication_(computing)

> - Evolve table schema where the same table columns can be added dynamically from

Author: ok, accepted except "schema" is better in singular

> > Evolve table schema where the same table columns can be added dynamically from
> > multiple connections
> >
> > Maintain the global order of the writes and schema changes across replica
> > nodes
> 

Reviewer 2: I think it is perhaps best to summarise all three points here.
No need to use block quote because we're not quoting anyone...

```suggestion
In summary, a database needs to be able to:
- Write data to the same table using multiple DB Nodes ([multi-master replication](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multi-master_replication)) or mirror the data to a read-only replicated node with automatic failover.
- Evolve table schema where the same table columns can be added dynamically from multiple connections
- Maintain the global order of the writes and schema changes across replica nodes.

```

Author: ok, accepted

## Sync and Async replication

Different things can go wrong with databases when a failure happens. For
instance, there can be two reasons why the database `Node 1` may not reply to

> `insert into A values(2)`: it can be either the node fails to receive and

Author: The low case is as correct as the upper case and that's how it's on the diagrams.

> `insert into A values(2)`: it can either be that the node fails to receive and

Author: good idea

process the transaction, or the OK reply is not delivered back to the
application due to a network disconnect.

> To avoid losing the second insert after disconnecting from `Node 1`, the

Author: Regardless of the node it's `insert into A values(2)`

> that the database does not create a duplicate record. In other words, data

Author: There are 2 goals:

- avoid gaps
- avoid duplicates

This paragraph used to be 

```
In order to not lose the second insert after the disconnect from  Node 1 the application has to send insert into A values(2) a second time to Node 2 in such a way so that the database does not create a duplicate record. In other words, data inserted into DB Node 1 has to be readable from  DB Node 2  immediately for the application to do the deduplication, or there must be another built-in mechanism to de-duplicate the inserted rows in the database.
```
and then it was corrected

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2159629/224074380-9cf2986a-902f-453f-9f00-0e88cbb6f4ec.png)

> that the database does not create a duplicate record. In other words, data

Author: I re-wrote the paragraph

that the database does not create a duplicate record. In other words, data
inserted into `Node 1` has to be readable from `Node 2`  

> immediately for the application to perform the deduplication. Alternatively,

Author: I cannot see any changes here

there must be another built-in mechanism to de-duplicate the inserted rows in
the database. This leads us to the conclusion that at least one of the points
below has to exist for a non-duplicating write failover:

> > Data written to one node is immediately selectable through all other replicas
> > so that the writing application can check for the duplicates
> >
> > De-duplication mechanism built into the insert protocol or table storage
> 

Reviewer 2: "one of" so again we should use bulleted list:
```suggestion
- Data written to one node is immediately selectable through all other replicas so that the writing application can check for the duplicates

- De-duplication mechanism built into the insert protocol or table storage

```

Author: ok, accepted

> - De-duplication mechanism built into the insert protocol or table storage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- There is a de-duplication mechanism built into the insert protocol or table storage
```

> - De-duplication mechanism built into the insert protocol or table storage

Reviewer: > built into the insert protocol or table storage

that does what? Ensures that rows only get written once to each node?

Author: Yes. The application can resend the inserts to the database after a failure and no duplicates are produced.

The first bullet point above is also called Synchronous (Sync) Replication where

> `Node 1` replies `OK` only after an insert is already replicated to `Node 2`. In

Reviewer: Move this to the first bullet point.  "This is called Synchronous (Sync) Replication ..."

> contrast, Asynchronous (Async) replication allows `Node 1` to reply `OK` to the

Reviewer: Move this to the second bullet point

`App` before replicating the inserted data to `Node 2`. This way `Node 2` may
not receive the first insert before `Node 1` goes down, so the database will
have to reattempt to replicated the data when `Node 1` is started/connected
back.

## Choice of Replication Flavor

> Back to my bike analogy, single primary with a read-only replica in Sync mode is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Back to my bike analogy, a databased configured in single primary with a read-only replica in Sync mode is
```

> something like riding one bike while simultaneously trying to roll another

Reviewer: ```suggestion
something akin to riding one bike while simultaneously trying to roll another
```

alongside you at all times. You can imagine that it's pretty hard to ride

> balancing on the two bikes and there is no way to cycle it fast!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
while simultaneously balancing on two bikes, and that it's near impossible to actually cycle it quickly!
```

<Banner
  alt="Sync bike riding"
  src="/img/blog/2023-03-03/bikes_alongside.jpeg"
  width={650}
>Sync replication bike riding</Banner>

> On the other hand, single primary with a read-only Async replica is similar to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the other hand, a database configured in single primary with a read-only Async replica is similar to
```

me buying a spare bike, storing it at work, and synchronizing my trip data when

> the bikes are at the same place. In case of a breakdown, I'll lose data from one

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the bikes are at the same place. In case of a breakdown, I'll lose data from that particular
```

> journey but I would still be able to continue commuting on the spare bike the
> same day.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
journey, but I would still be able to commute home on the spare bike that evening.

```

> I imagine multi-master replication is something like riding with a friend on two

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I imagine that multi-master replication is something like riding with a friend on two
```

> tandem bikes, where everyone is riding his own tandem on the first seat. If one

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tandem bikes, where you are each riding his or her own tandem bike on the first seat. If one
```

Author: I'm changing it to "where everyone rides the tandem on the first seat"

> of the tandems breaks, the rider can move to the back seat of another one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the tandems breaks, tha rider can move to the back seat of the other one.
```

Author: accepted "the other one." but not "tha"

Multi-master Sync replication is riding two tandems next to each other without the freedom of turning or stopping independently. Async replication would be the
independent rides with occasional location/trip data catch-ups.

> Async replication is the most reasonable choice in the world of bicycles, I do

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Async replication seems to be the most reasonable choice in the world of bicycles, since I do
```

Author: I want to express certainty that it's "the most reasonable choice in the world of bicycles"

> not see people running bikes in sync on the streets. It is also a default/only
> choice for many in the database world. Sync replication can be simple to reason

Reviewer: ```suggestion
not see people running bikes in sync on the streets. It is also usually a default (or the only)
choice for many databases. Sync replication can be simple to reason
```

Author: I meant that it is the default / only choice for people in the database world. In changed text it reads as if it's the default choice of the database

about, and may look like the best solution overall, but it has a hefty
performance price to pay since each step needs to wait until it is completed on

> every node. Counterintuitively, even though that Sync makes data available via
> multiple nodes at the same time Sync replication results in lower availability
> of the cluster since it dramatically reduces the transactions rate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
every node. Counterintuitively, even though synchronous replication makes data available to
multiple nodes at the same time, it also results in lower availability
of the cluster since it dramatically reduces the transactions rate.
```

> There is no silver bullet solution for the write failover problem and every

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is no silver bullet for the write failover problem and every
```

> database offers different replication flavors to choose from. To find the best

Reviewer: Add another header here.  Before we were talking about theory, but now we're talking about real DBs

Author: A header for a single paragraph is just too much. And the current header "Choice of Replication Flavor" matches the paragraph very well

> option for QuestDB we did serious research on how replication in other

Reviewer: ```suggestion
option for QuestDB, we did serious research on how replication in other
```

> time-series databases handle the write failover and here are some of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
time-series databases handles the write failover. Here are some of the
```

Author: I took the "handles" but did not split the sentence, the resulting sentence becomes too short

results.

## TimescaleDB

> Everyone loves classic relational databases, and nearly every developer is

Author: Plural is better imho

prepared to answer interview questions about ACID properties and sometimes even
about Transaction Isolation levels of different RDMS systems and what can go
wrong with each one of them. Writing distributed Read / Write applications using

> RDBMS is not easy but it is definitely doable.

Author: Too formal language, the style of the article is informal

> prepared to answer interview questions about ACID properties and sometimes even
> about Transaction Isolation levels of different RDMS systems and what can go
> wrong with each one of them. Writing distributed Read / Write applications using
> RDBMS is not easy but it is definitely doable.

Reviewer: ok, how about this?

```suggestion
prepared to answer interview questions about ACID properties and sometimes even
about Transaction Isolation levels of different RDMS systems (and what can go
wrong with each of them!). Building distributed Read / Write applications using
a RDBMS is not easy but it is definitely doable.
```

PostgreSQL is one of the leading Open Source RDMS, and some can say it's more

> than just a database. Postgres is also an extensible platform where you can, for

Author: Again, too formal

example, add a geographical location column type, a geospatial SQL Query syntax,
and indexes turning it into GIS system. Similarly, TimescaleDB is a PostgreSQL
extension built to optimize storage and query performance for time-series
workloads.

> Out of the Postgres box, TimescaleDB inherits its replication functionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TimescaleDB inherits its replication functionality directly from Postgres.
```

Author: Out of the box sounds more colorful

Reviewer: How about this then? I don't like breaking up the phrase "Out of the box"

```suggestion
Out of the box, TimescaleDB inherits its replication functionality from Postgres.
```

> PostgreSQL can have multiple read-only replicas with Sync or Async replication

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PostgreSQL supports multiple read-only replicas with Sync or Async replication
```

> with all the ACID and Transaction Isolation properties [and so does

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with all the ACID and Transaction Isolation properties that you would expect it to support. Therefore, [so does
```

Author: a bit too formal

Timescale](https://docs.timescale.com/timescaledb/latest/how-to-guides/replication-and-ha/).

> Unfortunately, automatic failover is not solved by either PostgreSQL or
> TimescaleDB but there are solutions like
> [Patroni](https://github.com/zalando/patroni). PostgreSQL describes the process

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, automatic failover is solved neither by PostgreSQL nor
TimescaleDB, but there are 3rd party solutions like
[Patroni](https://github.com/zalando/patroni) that add support for that functionality. PostgreSQL describes the process
```

[of failover as STONITH (Shoot The Other Node In The
Head)](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/15/warm-standby-failover.html) meaning

> that the primary node has to be shot down once it starts to misbehave.

Reviewer: Is this automatic failover? Is this what patroni does?

> Running Sync replication can solve the data gaps and duplicate problems after
> the failover. If the application detects the failover it can re-run the last

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Despite this, running Sync replication can solve the data gaps and duplication problems after
a node failover. If the database detects the failover, it can re-run the last
```

Author: This changes meaning. The application has to detect failures and re-run the inserts, not the database.

> non-confirmed Insert as an [UPSERT](https://wiki.postgresql.org/wiki/UPSERT).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
non-confirmed `INSERT` as an [UPSERT](https://wiki.postgresql.org/wiki/UPSERT).
```

> With Async replication, few recent transactions can be missing on the replica
> promoted to primary and because the old primary node has to be shot down
> (STONISHed) there is no trivial way to move the missing data to the new primary
> node after the failover.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Async replication, a few recent transactions may be missing on the replica that is
promoted to primary.  This is because the old primary node had to be shot down
(STONISHed) and there is no trivial way to move the missing data from that "dead" node to the new primary
node post-failover.
```

## ClickHouse

ClickHouse was developed Open Source for many years by Yandex, a search provider

> in Russia and a major competitor to Google in that market. ClickHouse has a
> comprehensive functionality in open-source (Apache 2.0) that includes high
> availability and horizontal scaling. There are also quite a few independent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in Russia and a major competitor to Google in that market. ClickHouse's functionality in open source (Apache 2.0) is comprehensive, which includes high
availability and horizontal scaling. There are also quite a few independent
```

managed cloud offerings that support ClickHouse:

- [ClickHouse (Yandex spin-off)](https://clickhouse.com/cloud)
- [Altinity](https://altinity.com/)
- [Alibaba](https://www.alibabacloud.com/product/clickhouse)

It makes sense to talk about ClickHouse's replication in the context of its Open

> Source product since cloud features can vary dramatically from provider to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Source product, since cloud features can vary dramatically from provider to
```

provider.

> The great thing about ClickHouse Open Source is that it supports horizontal
> scaling with multi-master writes. So if a DBA creates a cluster with `Node 1`
> and `Node 2` and replicated table `A` (called ReplicationMergeTree engine).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The great thing about ClickHouse Open Source is that it supports horizontal
scaling with multi-master writes. So if a DBA creates a cluster with 2 nodes (`Node 1`
and `Node 2`) and replicated table `A` (using the ReplicationMergeTree engine):
```

When `Bob` sends to `Node 1`

```SQL
INSERT INTO A VALUES(1);
```

And `Alice` sends to `Node 2`

```SQL
INSERT INTO A VALUES(2);
```

> Two records will be written to each of the nodes. When `INSERT INTO A VALUES(1)`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both records will be written to each of the nodes. When `INSERT INTO A VALUES(1)`
```

Author: ok

> Two records will be written to each of the nodes. When `INSERT INTO A VALUES(1)`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Two records will be written to each of the nodes. When the `INSERT INTO A VALUES(1)`
```

> statement is received on `Node 1`, ClickHouse writes it to `part 1_1`. Next

Reviewer: ```suggestion
statement is received on `Node 1`, ClickHouse writes it to `part 1_1`. Next,
```

> `Node 1` registers the data part with the Zookeeper (or it can be ClickHouse

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Node 1` registers the data part with the Zookeeper (or ClickHouse
```

Keeper). Zookeeper notifies each node about the new part, and the nodes download

> the data from the source and apply it to the local table replica. The same

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the data from this source and apply it to each's local table replica. The same
```

Author: I think "this source" is confusing, there is no single source here. Nodes download the data from each other

Reviewer: it's just that using "the" twice (`the source` and `the local table replica`) is a bit confusing.. is there another way we can word this?

Author: The diagram above is better than any wording we come up with.

> happens simultaneously with `INSERT 2`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
operation happens simultaneously with `INSERT 2`.
```

Author: It's more like a process, not an operation. I'm changing it to process.

<Banner
  alt="ClickHouse multi-master replication"

>   src="/img/blog/2023-03-03/Multi-maser-replication-ClickHouse.png"

Reviewer 2: ![Screenshot 2023-03-07 at 10 38 29](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/107401731/223400488-94662d15-56bf-4784-87ca-015e9f9048c5.png)

Author: Changed diagram to fix the first point.

Re the second question, part2_1 is applied on the `Node 2` after part1_1 to maintain the application order. Maintaining the order of the transactions is one of the goals

  width={744}
>ClickHouse multi-master replication</Banner>

In this architecture, inserts can be written to each of the nodes in parallel.

What about reading the data back? ClickHouse documentation states that the
replication process is Asynchronous and it may take some time for `Node 2` to catch
up with `Node 1`. There is however an option to specify `insert_quorum` with
every insert. If the `insert_quorum` is set to `2` then it means that the

> application gets the response back after both `Node 1` and `Node 2` have the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
application gets confirmation back from the database after both `Node 1` and `Node 2` have the
```

> data inserted turning it into Sync replication. There are a few more settings to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
data inserted, effectively turning this into Sync replication. There are a few more settings to
```

consider like `insert_quorum_parallel`, `insert_quorum_timeout` and
`select_sequential_consistency` to define how concurrent parallel inserts work.

It is also possible to modify the table schema by adding new columns on the
replicated table. An `ALTER TABLE` statement can be sent to any of the nodes in

> the cluster, and it will be replicated across the nodes. ClickHouse does not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the cluster, and like the `INSERT`s described earlier, it will be replicated across the nodes. However, ClickHouse does not
```

allow concurrent table schema change execution so if 2 of the nodes receive the
same non-conflicting statement

```SQL
ALTER table A add column if not exists TIMESTAMP datatime64(6)
```

> one of the nodes can reply with the failure:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
one of the nodes will reply with the failure:
```

Author: It may not reply with a failure, only sometimes.

```

> Metadata on replica is not up to date with common metadata in Zookeeper.
> It means that this replica still not applied some of previous alters.
> Probably too many alters executing concurrently (highly not recommended).
> You can retry this error

Reviewer 2: Is this an actual quotation from the error message? I'd write it as:

```suggestion
Metadata on the replica is not up to date with common metadata in Zookeeper.
It means that this replica still has not applied some of the previous alters.
There are probably too many alters executing concurrently (highly not recommended).
You can retry this error.
```

Author: It's quotation, yes

```

SQL Update statements are also written in ClickHouse dialect as `ALTER TABLE`
but fortunately, they can be executed in parallel without the above error.

> ClickHouse also has a useful method to solve lost writing confirmations; in case

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ClickHouse also has a useful method to solve lost write confirmations; in cases where
```

an `INSERT` (or other) query confirmation is lost because of a network disconnect
or timeout, the client can resend the whole block of data in exactly the same way

> to any other available node. The receiving node then calculates the hash
> code of the data and not apply it a second time if it is able to
> recognize that this data has already been applied via another node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to any other available node. The receiving node then calculates and stores the hash
code of the message's data, not applying it a second time if it recognizes that this data has already been applied via another node.
```

Author: Zookeeper stores the hash, not the node.

There are more options and flavors of how to set up replication in ClickHouse,

> the most popular approach being `ReplicatedMergeTree` storage.

Reviewer: Any more detail on this?

## InfluxDB

InfluxDB has the highest [DB engines time series
ranking](https://db-engines.com/en/ranking/time+series+dbms) at the time of

> writing, and I feel that it has to be included here even though InfluxDB

Reviewer: ```suggestion
writing, and I feel that it has to be included here even though InfluxData
```

> [removed the clustering product from open source

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[removed the clustering product from the open source version
```

in 2016](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/InfluxDB#Closed_source_clustering_components)
to sell it as a commercial product, InfluxDB Enterprise. Since then, their focus
has shifted from the enterprise version to the cloud offering in recent years,

> where they built InfluxDB Cloud v2. While this is a closed-source system, its

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where they have built InfluxDB Cloud v2. While this is a closed-source system, its
```

high-level architecture is deducible from the marketing diagrams InfluxData
officially provides.

<Banner
  alt="InfluxDB cloud architecture"
  src="/img/blog/2023-03-03/Influx Cloud Architecture.png"
  width={750}
>InfluxDB cloud architecture</Banner>

> InfluxDB Cloud v2 persists incoming writes to the Write Ahead Log written over a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
InfluxDB Cloud v2 persists incoming writes to the Write Ahead Log (WAL) written over a
```

> Kafka cluster. It is a clean solution that solves the durability of the WAL and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kafka cluster. It is a clean solution that improves the durability of the WAL and
```

Author: I'll change it to "solves durability and distribution"

> ensures that the data is already replicated when the client receives the write

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ensures that the data is already replicated when the client receives a write
```

confirmation.

> Applying to the "Queryable" storage runs asynchronously in the Ingester

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Writing to the "Queryable" storage runs asynchronously in the Ingester
```

Reviewer: Not sure if this is still accurate..

Author: I'd keep applying, it makes more sense. Async writing sounds more like IO feature of the application rather than a high-level architecture concept.

> component, consuming messages from Kafka WAL and writing them to 2 independent
> TSDB copies. There is a delay between reading the message confirmed to be
> written, in Influx term is called [Time to Become
> Readable](https://docs.influxdata.com/influxdb/cloud/reference/internals/ttbr/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
component, consuming messages from the Kafka WAL and writing them to 2 independent
TSDB copies. This creates a delay between the time of the write confirmation and when it can be read.  In Influx terms, this is called [Time to Become
Readable](https://docs.influxdata.com/influxdb/cloud/reference/internals/ttbr/).
```

Author: "time of the write confirmation and when it can be read" does not sound good, sorry. "It" is confusing here as if it means confirmation, not the data.

> Influx protocol messages are idempotent in the sense that the same message can

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The InfluxDB line protocol messages are idempotent in the sense that the same message can
```

Author: No, that's an incorrect suggestion. Influx has more protocols other than Line protocol, independently of protocol, messages are idempotent.

Reviewer 2: What I was trying to resolve is to be specific about Influx or InfluxDB. I am not sure if it is a conscious choice to use Influx, or it is just a short-hand for InfluxDB/InfluxData.  It should be specified.

Author: InfluxData is the company name, InfluxDB is the product name and it can informally be shortened to Influx. In this case, I am talking about InfluxDB Cloud by InfluxData but it's too verbose and I can call it Influx.

be processed many times without creating duplicates. This is because in InfluxDB,
the same set of tags can have only one row per timestamp value. So if one sends
a line:

```
measurement1 field=34.23 1562387656300000000
```

and then sends another line with the same measurement and timestamp:

```
measurement1 new_fields=0.1234 1562387656300000000
```

> the new filed value will be added to the same line as if the fields were sent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the new field value will be added to the same line as if the fields were sent
```

> together:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
together, in the same message:
```

```
measurement1 field=34.23,new_fields=0.1234 1562387656300000000
```

> And if the any of above rows are sent again, Influx will not add a new row. This

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And if the any of above messages are sent again, Influx will not add a new row. This
```

approach solves the problem of resending data on timeout or lost replies. So if

> the client does not receive the write confirmation from Influx cloud, it can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the client does not receive a write confirmation from Influx cloud, it can
```

> re-send the same data again and again. [This is how it is described in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
re-send the same data again and again. At least this is how it is described [in the
```

Author: "At least" casts a doubt about correctness, I don't have a doubt in this case.

documentation.](https://docs.influxdata.com/influxdb/v1.8/troubleshooting/frequently-asked-questions/#how-does-influxdb-handle-duplicate-points)

> When the data is sent with the same timestamp and tag set from different

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the data is sent with the same timestamp and tagset from different
```

Reviewer: not sure if this is a real word or not, but it flows better in my head :-)

Author: Influx spells it with a space "tag set": https://docs.influxdata.com/influxdb/v1.8/concepts/glossary/#tag-set

connections:

```
measurement1 field1=1 1677851990000000000
measurement1 field1=2,field2=2000 1677851990000000000
```

> The querying storage nodes can become inconsistent for some time returning any

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The querying storage nodes can become inconsistent for some time, returning any
```

row out of the 3:

| field1 | field2 | time                     |
| ------ | ------ | ------------------------ |
| 1      |        | 2023-03-03T13:59:50.000Z |
| 2      | 2000   | 2023-03-03T13:59:50.000Z |
| 1      | 2000   | 2023-03-03T13:59:50.000Z |

> It can even be that the first query returns `field1=1`, the then second query

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It can even be that the first query returns `field1=1`, a second query returns
```

> `field1=2` and then the third try is back to `field1=1`. Eventually, the query

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`field1=2` and then a third try flips back to `field1=1`. Eventually, the query
```

> result becomes stable and returns the same data on each run. This is the very

Reviewer: ```suggestion
result will become stable and return the same data on each run. This is a very
```

> typical outcome from querying in Round Robinthe nodes with Async replication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
typical outcome for querying nodes in Round Robin with Async replication.
```

> Influx data model also solves the problem of dynamically evolving schema. Since

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Influx data model also solves the problem of a dynamically evolving schema. Since
```

> there are no traditional columns (fields and tags are added automatically),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
there are no traditional columns (since any unknown fields and tags that are encountered are added automatically by the database engine),
```

> there is no problem writing a different set of fields to the same measurement by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
there is no problem writing a different set of fields for the same measurement by
```

> design. Influx also checks for schema conflicts and returns errors to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
design. For fields and tags that already exist, Influx does check for schema conflicts and returns errors to the
```

Author: I belive "schema conflict" is descriptive enough, no need to expand what it means

writing application if there are any. For example, if the same field is sent as
a number and then as a string:

```
m1 value=34.23 1562387656300000000
m1 value="hello" 1562387656300000123
```

The write will fail with the error
`column value is type f64 but write has type string` or
`column value is type string but write has type f64`.

> ## Line up

Reviewer 2: The noun is Line-up and I am not sure about this here. It's usually for presenting guests of an event. I'd stick to something boring...Comparison/Overview...

Author: Changed it to Summary

> This is the summary of trying to compare the databases for the features needed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is a feature comparison of databases that are trying
```

Author: I'm changing it to 

```
Here is the summary of the replication features supported by time-series databases 
relevant to High Availability write use case:
```

> This is the summary of trying to compare the databases for the features needed
> to solve the basic Hight Availability scenario:
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The table below summarizes the features needed to achieve the basic high availability for different databases:
```

Author: The table does not summarise the features needed. I summarise the support of the features by different vendors.

Reviewer 2: Okay my rewriting was based on the original text so the original text is not right...

For me it is very strange that the scenario needs to be solved.

Maybe:

The table below summarizes the features for basic high availability from different databases:

| Uses WAL for Replication                     | Yes                      | Yes¹       | Yes            |
| Multi-master replication                     | No                       | Yes        | No             |
| Supports Sync replication                    | Yes                      | Yes        | No             |
| Supports Async replication                   | Yes                      | Yes        | Yes            |
| Concurrently evolves replicated table schema | Yes                      | Yes²       | Yes³           |
| Same Insert / Update order on all nodes      | Yes                      | Yes        | Yes³           |
| No gaps and duplicates after failover        | Sync mode only           | Yes        | Yes            |

¹ ClickHouse replication Data Part plays the role of WAL

² Concurrent schema updates have to be re-tried

³ InfluxDB cloud is a closed-source system, certain conclusions are made on the
assumption of the reasonable use of Kafka WAL partitioning and the correctness
of this claim depends on the implementation.

To draw up some conclusions:

- All 3 systems replicate by writing to the Write Ahead Log and copying it
  across the nodes.

> - Asynchronous replication where data written to Node 1 is eventually visible at
>   Node 2 is the most popular approach used by InfluxDB Cloud and default in
>   ClickHouse, Postgres.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Asynchronous replication, where data written to Node 1 is eventually visible at
  Node 2, is the most popular approach used by InfluxDB Cloud and is the default in
  ClickHouse, Postgres.
```

> - Postgres / Timescale replication can be used in both synchronous and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Postgres (and by proxy Timescale) replication can be used in both synchronous and
```

Author: I like slashes as you noticed. I think it ok and also underplays Timescale difference from Postgres in general

  asynchronous modes, but it does not have multi-master replication and there is
  no option for automatic failover. It is not possible to solve write failover
  without additional software systems or human intervention.

- Multi-master replication is available in ClickHouse. There are also enough

>   turnings to strike the balance between writing data loss in extreme scenarios

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  available settings to strike an appropriate balance between experiencing data loss (in extreme scenarios)
```

  and writing throughput.

> - InfluxDB does not offer replication support in open source. There is a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- InfluxDB does not offer replication support in its open source product. There is a
```

  closed-source cloud solution that leverages Kafka to solve automatic write
  failover. Kafka replication is not multi-master but with the help of automatic
  failover, it solves high-availability write use cases.

## QuestDB Replication Plans

QuestDB released Write Ahead Log table storage mode in v7.0 as the first step in

> our replication journey. It uses multi-master write architecture internally to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
our replication journey. It uses a multi-master write architecture internally to
```

make non-locking writes to the same table possible from parallel connections.

> The transactions are written in parallel to different WAL segments, and a global

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Transactions are written in parallel to different WAL segments, and a global
```

Author: accepted

> order of commits is maintained in the Sequencer component. The most complicated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
order of commits is maintained in a Sequencer component. The most complicated
```

Author: accepted

> bit is automatic schema conflict resolution so that table schema changes can be
> done in parallel too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
bit is automatic schema conflict resolution so that table schema changes can also be
be performed in parallel.
```

<Banner
  alt="QuestDB WAL writing"
  src="/img/blog/2023-03-03/QuestDB sequencer WAL diagram.png"
  width={750}
>QuestDB WAL writing</Banner>

> We tried to avoid having a Write Ahead Log for a long time writing directly into

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We tried to avoid having a Write Ahead Log for a long time by writing directly into
```

Author: accepted

> We tried to avoid having a Write Ahead Log for a long time writing directly into
> the table storage. It was not an easy decision to accept WAL write amplification
> for the sake of a cleaner path to the replication and to solve no-locking

Reviewer 2: I guess this is what you want to say?
```suggestion
We tried to avoid having a Write Ahead Log that writes directly into
the table storage for a long time. It was not an easy decision to accept WAL write amplification
for the sake of a cleaner path to the replication and to solve no-locking
```

Author: No, not at all!

Writing to Write Ahead Log is the opposite of writing directly to table storage.

Author: Perhaps it needs a comma in front of the writing and that's it?

```suggestion
We tried to avoid having a Write Ahead Log for a long time, writing directly into
the table storage. It was not an easy decision to accept WAL write amplification
for the sake of a cleaner path to the replication and to solve no-locking
```

Reviewer 2: Yes that'd work too!

> for the sake of a cleaner path to the replication and to solve no-locking

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for the sake of a cleaner path to replication and non-locking
```

parallel writes. In the end, the additional write operations did not impact

> overall throughput and on the contrary, because of better parallelism, we

Reviewer: ```suggestion
overall throughput.  On the contrary, because of better parallelism, we
```

achieved 3x better write performance in [Time Series Benchmarking
Suite](https://github.com/timescale/tsbs) compared [to our own (quite
extraordinary) performance for non-WAL
tables](https://questdb.io/blog/2021/05/10/questdb-release-6-0-tsbs-benchmark/).

Looking at how other databases solve the replication problem, we chose our goal

> to archive multi-master replication with Async consistency. We believe this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to be achieving multi-master replication with Async consistency. We believe that this
```

basic use cases of any time series database is to support nonstop writing. Using
my bike analogy, if I had a device on my bicycle to record my trip with very
high precision, saving the location multiple times per second, that would be
somewhat similar to this requirement. And in the ideal world, if the bike breaks
down, I could just switch to a spare right on the spot, in the middle of the
road, and continue my journey along with all of my trip data saved without
delay.

A similar scenario is when an application writes to a database. When it sends
inserts to a table and then suddenly gets a network disconnect, the application
should switch to a replicated node and continue inserting.

So if I had an application `App` writing to DB `Node 1` with replica DB `Node 2`
I could draw the use case as a sequence diagram:

<Banner
  alt="Write failover use case"
  src="/img/blog/2023-03-03/Write failover sequence diagram.png"
  width={531}
>Write failover use case</Banner>

Seems straightforward, but is it easy to get a database to play its part in this
dance? I believe it's not. To achieve this, the database has to be able to write
data into the same table A through multiple nodes.

> - Write data to the same table using multiple DB Nodes

Reviewer 2: The point is adding a list without specifying what the list is for is very confusing. I have proposed a rewriting today.

application due to a network disconnect.

To avoid losing the second insert after disconnecting from `Node 1`, the
application has to send `insert into A values(2)` a second time to `Node 2` so
that the database does not create a duplicate record. In other words, data
inserted into `Node 1` has to be readable from `Node 2`  
immediately for the application to perform the deduplication. Alternatively,
there must be another built-in mechanism to de-duplicate the inserted rows in
the database. This leads us to the conclusion that at least one of the points
below has to exist for a non-duplicating write failover:

- Data written to one node is immediately selectable through all other replicas
  so that the writing application can check for the duplicates

- De-duplication mechanism built into the insert protocol or table storage

The first bullet point above is also called Synchronous (Sync) Replication where
`Node 1` replies `OK` only after an insert is already replicated to `Node 2`. In
contrast, Asynchronous (Async) replication allows `Node 1` to reply `OK` to the
`App` before replicating the inserted data to `Node 2`. This way `Node 2` may

> not receive the first insert before `Node 1` goes down, so the database will

Reviewer 2: "the first insert" is referring to:
insert into A values(1)? to constitute with the example in the diagram above, or does it mean:
insert into A values(2)? (I think this is the correct answer)

Maybe simplify this to:

```suggestion
not receive the insert before `Node 1` goes down, so the database will
```

Author: "the first insert" is referres to `insert into A values(1)`

have to reattempt to replicated the data when `Node 1` is started/connected
back.

## Choice of Replication Flavor

Back to my bike analogy, single primary with a read-only replica in Sync mode is
something like riding one bike while simultaneously trying to roll another
alongside you at all times. You can imagine that it's pretty hard to ride
balancing on the two bikes and there is no way to cycle it fast!

<Banner
  alt="Sync bike riding"
  src="/img/blog/2023-03-03/bikes_alongside.jpeg"
  width={650}
>Sync replication bike riding</Banner>

On the other hand, single primary with a read-only Async replica is similar to
me buying a spare bike, storing it at work, and synchronizing my trip data when
the bikes are at the same place. In case of a breakdown, I'll lose data from one
journey but I would still be able to continue commuting on the spare bike the
same day.

I imagine multi-master replication is something like riding with a friend on two
tandem bikes, where everyone is riding his own tandem on the first seat. If one
of the tandems breaks, the rider can move to the back seat of another one.

> Multi-master Sync replication is riding two tandems next to each other without
> having the freedom to turn or stop independently. Async replication would be the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Multi-master Sync replication is riding two tandems next to each other without the freedom of turning or stopping independently. Async replication would be the
```

independent rides with occasional location/trip data catch-ups.

Async replication is the most reasonable choice in the world of bicycles, I do
not see people running bikes in sync on the streets. It is also a default/only
choice for many in the database world. Sync replication can be simple to reason
about, and may look like the best solution overall, but it has a hefty
performance price to pay since each step needs to wait until it is completed on
every node. Counterintuitively, even though that Sync makes data available via
multiple nodes at the same time Sync replication results in lower availability
of the cluster since it dramatically reduces the transactions rate.

> To sum up, to solve write failover problem we need
> 
> - Multi-master replication or single primary node with multiple read-only

Reviewer 2: I'd avoid using a list with only one point:
```suggestion
To sum up, to solve the write failover problem we need multi-master replication or single primary node with multiple read-only
```
Also what does " automatic failover" mean in:

with multiple read-only secondary nodes with automatic failover

Author: That's 3 bullet points, the first and one of the second or third

Reviewer 2: The three bullet points should be put together in my opinion.

Author: I removed this paragraph entirely. I changed to blockquote instead of bullet points earlier on

  secondary nodes with automatic failover

> And to solve data loss/deduplication

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And to solve data loss/deduplication, we should consider:
```

Author: too sterile

Reviewer 2: Again, it's okay to use other wording but the list should be introduced.

Author: I accepted your list structure, please have a look

- Synchronous replication to deduplicate the data by the writing application

> - Multi-master Asynchronous replication with storage deduplication can work in
>   cases when node failures are not fatal and DB node eventually comes back
>   online

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Multi-master Asynchronous replication with storage deduplication, in
  cases when node failures are not fatal and DB node eventually comes back
  online
```

There is no silver bullet solution for the write failover problem and every
Database offers different replication flavors to choose from. To find the best
option for QuestDB we did serious research on how replication in other
time-series databases can help with writing failover and here are some of the
results.

## TimescaleDB

> Everyone loves classic Relational Databases, and nearly every developer is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Everyone loves classic relational databases, and nearly every developer is
```

prepared to answer interview questions about ACID properties and sometimes even
about Transaction Isolation levels of different RDMS systems and what can go
wrong with each one of them. Writing distributed Read / Write applications using
RDBMS is not easy but it is definitely doable.

PostgreSQL is one of the leading Open Source RDMS, and some can say it's more
than just a database. Postgres is also an extensible platform where you can, for
example, add a geographical location column type, a geospatial SQL Query syntax,
and indexes turning it into GIS system. Similarly, TimescaleDB is a PostgreSQL
extension built to optimize storage and query performance for time-series
workloads.

Out of the Postgres box, TimescaleDB inherits its replication functionality.
PostgreSQL can have multiple read-only replicas with Sync or Async replication
with all the ACID and Transaction Isolation properties (and so does

> Timescale)[https://docs.timescale.com/timescaledb/latest/how-to-guides/replication-and-ha/].

Reviewer 2: Do you mean to make it a hyperlink?
```suggestion
with all the ACID and Transaction Isolation properties [and so does
Timescale](https://docs.timescale.com/timescaledb/latest/how-to-guides/replication-and-ha/).
```

Author: done

Unfortunately, automatic failover is not solved by either PostgreSQL or
TimescaleDB but there are solutions like

> (Patroni)[https://github.com/zalando/patroni]. PostgreSQL describes the process

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Patroni](https://github.com/zalando/patroni). PostgreSQL describes the process
```

Author: done

(of failover as STONITH (Shoot The Other Node In The
Head))[https://www.postgresql.org/docs/15/warm-standby-failover.html] meaning

> that the primary node has to be shot down once it starts to misbehave.

Reviewer 2: Is the parenthesis before "of failover" intentional?
```suggestion
of failover as STONITH, [Shoot The Other Node In The
Head](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/15/warm-standby-failover.html), meaning
that the primary node has to be shot down once it starts to misbehave.
```

Author: done

Running Sync replication can solve the data gaps and duplicate problems after
the failover. If the application detects the failover it can re-run the last
non-confirmed Insert as an (UPSERT)[https://wiki.postgresql.org/wiki/UPSERT].

> With Async replication, few recent transactions can be missing on the replica

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
non-confirmed Insert as an [UPSERT](https://wiki.postgresql.org/wiki/UPSERT).
With Async replication, few recent transactions can be missing on the replica
```

Author: done

promoted to primary and because the old primary node has to be shot down
(STONISHed) there is no trivial way to move the missing data to the new primary
node after the failover.

## ClickHouse

ClickHouse was developed Open Source for many years by Yandex, a search provider
in Russia and a major competitor to Google in that market. ClickHouse has a
comprehensive functionality in open-source (Apache 2.0) that includes high
availability and horizontal scaling. There are also quite a few independent
managed cloud offerings that support ClickHouse:

- (ClickHouse (Yandex spin-off))[https://clickhouse.com/cloud]
- (Altinity)[https://altinity.com/]

> - (Alibaba)[https://www.alibabacloud.com/product/clickhouse]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [ClickHouse (Yandex spin-off)](https://clickhouse.com/cloud)
- [Altinity](https://altinity.com/)
- [Alibaba](https://www.alibabacloud.com/product/clickhouse)
```

Author: done

It makes sense to talk about ClickHouse's replication in the context of its Open
Source product since cloud features can vary dramatically from provider to
provider.

The great thing about ClickHouse Open Source is that it supports horizontal
scaling with multi-master writes. So if a DBA creates a cluster with `Node 1`
and `Node 2` and replicated table `A` (called ReplicationMergeTree engine).

When `Bob` sends to `Node 1`

```SQL
INSERT INTO A VALUES(1);
```

And `Alice` sends to `Node 2`

```SQL
INSERT INTO A VALUES(2);
```

Two records will be written to each of the nodes. When `INSERT INTO A VALUES(1)`
statement is received on `Node 1`, ClickHouse writes it to `part 1_1`. Next
`Node 1` registers the data part with the Zookeeper (or it can be ClickHouse
Keeper). Zookeeper notifies each node about the new part, and the nodes download
the data from the source and apply it to the local table replica. The same

> happens simultaneously with `INSERT 2`

Reviewer 2: Either ";" or "."

Author: added . in the end is it what you mean?

<Banner
  alt="ClickHouse multi-master replication"
  src="/img/blog/2023-03-03/Multi-maser-replication-ClickHouse.png"
  width={750}

> >ClickHouse multi-master replication</Banner>

Reviewer 2: I think there is something wrong with this section:
 
![Screenshot 2023-03-06 at 11 34 31](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/107401731/223099379-835716bd-4657-4cec-8ae3-f2c55d9e0e01.png)

Node2 is not really mentioned at all?

Author: well spotted, I'll change it

Author: changed

In this architecture, inserts can be written to each of the nodes in parallel.

What about reading the data back? ClickHouse documentation states that the

> replication process is Asynchronous and it may take some time `Node 2` to catch

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
replication process is Asynchronous and it may take some time for `Node 2` to catch
```

Author: My grammarly says for is redundant, are you sure?

Reviewer 2: Pretty sure it does not make sense at all as it is...My Grammarly seems to agree too:
![Screenshot 2023-03-07 at 10 30 05](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/107401731/223396460-b597ca10-b15c-4da8-9f34-d8d516ed581b.png)

up with `Node 1`. There is however an option to specify `insert_quorum` with
every insert. If the `insert_quorum` is set to `2` then it means that the
application gets the response back after both `Node 1` and `Node 2` have the
data inserted turning it into Sync replication. There are a few more settings to
consider like `insert_quorum_parallel`, `insert_quorum_timeout` and
`select_sequential_consistency` to define how concurrent parallel inserts work.

It is also possible to modify the table schema by adding new columns on the
replicated table. An `ALTER TABLE` statement can be sent to any of the nodes in
the cluster, and it will be replicated across the nodes. ClickHouse does not

> allow concurrent table schema change execution so if 2 of the nodes receive the
> same non-conflicting statement

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
allow concurrent table schema change execution so if two of the nodes receive the
same non-conflicting statement:
```

Author: why two is better than 2? It's technical text

```SQL
ALTER table A add column if not exists TIMESTAMP datatime64(6)
```

one of the nodes can reply with the failure:

```
Metadata on replica is not up to date with common metadata in Zookeeper.
It means that this replica still not applied some of previous alters.
Probably too many alters executing concurrently (highly not recommended).
You can retry this error
```

SQL Update statements are also written in ClickHouse dialect as `ALTER TABLE`
but fortunately, they can be executed in parallel without the above error.

ClickHouse also has a useful method to solve lost writing confirmations; in case
an `INSERT` (or other) query confirmation is lost because of network disconnect
or timeout, the client resends the whole block of data in the exactly same way
to any other available node. The receiving node then will calculate the hash
code of the received data and not apply it a second time if it is able to
recognize that this data has already been applied on another node.

There are more options and flavors of how to set up replication in ClickHouse,
the most popular approach being `ReplicatedMergeTree` storage.

## InfluxDB

InfluxDB has the highest (DB engines time series

> ranking)[https://db-engines.com/en/ranking/time+series+dbms] at the time of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
InfluxDB has the highest [DB engines time series
ranking](https://db-engines.com/en/ranking/time+series+dbms) at the time of
```

Author: done

writing, and I feel that it has to be included here even though InfluxDB
(removed the clustering product from open source

> in 2016)[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/InfluxDB#Closed_source_clustering_components]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[removed the clustering product from open source
in 2016](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/InfluxDB#Closed_source_clustering_components)
```

Author: done

to sell it as a commercial product, InfluxDB Enterprise. Since then, their focus
has shifted from the enterprise version to the cloud offering in recent years,
where they built InfluxDB Cloud v2. While this is a closed-source system, its
high-level architecture is deducible from the marketing diagrams InfluxData
officially provides.

<Banner
  alt="InfluxDB cloud architecture"
  src="/img/blog/2023-03-03/Influx Cloud Architecture.png"
  width={750}
>InfluxDB cloud architecture</Banner>

InfluxDB Cloud v2 persists incoming writes to the Write Ahead Log written over a
Kafka cluster. It is a clean solution that solves the durability of the WAL and
ensures that the data is already replicated when the client receives the write
confirmation.

Applying to the "Queryable" storage runs asynchronously in the Ingester
component, consuming messages from Kafka WAL and writing them to 2 independent
TSDB copies. There is a delay between reading the message confirmed to be
written, in Influx term is called (Time to Become
Readable)[https://docs.influxdata.com/influxdb/cloud/reference/internals/ttbr/].

> 

Author: done

Influx protocol messages are idempotent in the sense that the same message can
be processed many times without creating duplicates. This is because in Influx,
the same set of tags can have only one row per timestamp value. So if one sends

> a line

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a line:
```

```
measurement1 field=34.23 1562387656300000000
```

> and then sends another line with the same measurement and timestamp

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and then sends another line with the same measurement and timestamp:
```

```
measurement1 new_fields=0.1234 1562387656300000000
```

the new filed value will be added to the same line as if the fields were sent

> together
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
together:

```

```
measurement1 field=34.23,new_fields=0.1234 1562387656300000000
```

And if the any of above rows are sent again, Influx will not add a new row. This
approach solves the problem of resending data on timeout or lost replies. So if
the client does not receive the write confirmation from Influx cloud, it can
re-send the same data again and again. (This is how it is described in the
documentation.)[https://docs.influxdata.com/influxdb/v1.8/troubleshooting/frequently-asked-questions/#how-does-influxdb-handle-duplicate-points]

> When the data is sent with the same timestamp and tag set from different

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
re-send the same data again and again. This is how it is described in the
[documentation](https://docs.influxdata.com/influxdb/v1.8/troubleshooting/frequently-asked-questions/#how-does-influxdb-handle-duplicate-points).
When the data is sent with the same timestamp and tag set from different
```

Author: done

connections

```
measurement1 field1=1 1677851990000000000
measurement1 field1=2,field2=2000 1677851990000000000
```

The querying storage nodes can become inconsistent for some time returning any
row out of the 3

| field1 | field2 | time                     |
| ------ | ------ | ------------------------ |
| 1      |        | 2023-03-03T13:59:50.000Z |
| 2      | 2000   | 2023-03-03T13:59:50.000Z |
| 1      | 2000   | 2023-03-03T13:59:50.000Z |

It can even be that the first query returns `field1=1`, the then second query
`field1=2` and then the third try is back to `field1=1`. Eventually, the query
result becomes stable and returns the same data on each run. This is the very
typical outcome from querying in Round Robinthe nodes with Async replication.

Influx data model also solves the problem of dynamically evolving schema. Since
there are no traditional columns (fields and tags are added automatically),
there is no problem writing a different set of fields to the same measurement by
design. Influx also checks for schema conflicts and returns errors to the
writing application if there are any. For example, if the same field is sent as

> a number and then as a string

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a number and then as a string:
```

```
m1 value=34.23 1562387656300000000
m1 value="hello" 1562387656300000123
```

> the write will fail with the error

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The write will fail with the error
```

`column value is type f64 but write has type string` or
`column value is type string but write has type f64`.

## Line up

This is the summary of trying to compare the databases for the features needed

> to solve the basic Hight Availability scenario

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to solve the basic Hight Availability scenario:
```

| -------------------------------------------- | ------------------------ | ---------- | -------------- |
| Uses WAL for Replication                     | Yes                      | Yes¹       | Yes            |
| Multi-master replication                     | No                       | Yes        | No             |
| Supports Sync replication                    | Yes                      | Yes        | No             |
| Supports Async replication                   | Yes                      | Yes        | Yes            |
| Concurrently evolves replicated table schema | Yes                      | Yes²       | Yes³           |
| Same Insert / Update order on all nodes      | Yes                      | Yes        | Yes³           |
| No gaps and duplicates after failover        | Sync mode only           | Yes        | Yes            |

¹ ClickHouse replication Data Part plays the role of WAL

² Concurrent schema updates have to be re-tried

³ InfluxDB cloud is a closed-source system, certain conclusions are made on the
assumption of the reasonable use of Kafka WAL partitioning and the correctness
of this claim depends on the implementation.

To draw up some conclusions:

> - All 3 systems replicate by writing to the Write Ahead Log and copying it

Author: I like numbers, I'm not alone

https://www.stylemanual.gov.au/grammar-punctuation-and-conventions/numbers-and-measurements/choosing-numerals-or-words

> - All 3 systems replicate by writing to the Write Ahead Log and copying it

Reviewer 2: I believe the industry standard is to spell out numbers under 10. I also do so for most of the pages so I think we should be consistent.

> - All 3 systems replicate by writing to the Write Ahead Log and copying it

Author: Multiple authors in the blogs can have different style from the documentation, it make it more interesting to read.

our replication journey. It uses multi-master write architecture internally to
make non-locking writes to the same table possible from parallel connections.
The transactions are written in parallel to different WAL segments, and a global
order of commits is maintained in the Sequencer component. The most complicated
bit is automatic schema conflict resolution so that table schema changes can be
done in parallel too.

<Banner
  alt="QuestDB WAL writing"
  src="/img/blog/2023-03-03/QuestDB sequencer WAL diagram.png"
  width={750}
>QuestDB WAL writing</Banner>

We tried to avoid having a Write Ahead Log for a long time writing directly into
the table storage. It was not an easy decision to accept WAL write amplification
for the sake of a cleaner path to the replication and to solve no-locking
parallel writes. In the end, the additional write operations did not impact
overall throughput and on the contrary, because of better parallelism, we
achieved 3x better write performance in (Time Series Benchmarking
Suite)[https://github.com/timescale/tsbs] compared (to our own (quite
extraordinary) performance for non-WAL

> tables)[https://questdb.io/blog/2021/05/10/questdb-release-6-0-tsbs-benchmark/].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
achieved 3x better write performance in [Time Series Benchmarking
Suite](https://github.com/timescale/tsbs) compared to our own (quite
extraordinary) performance for [non-WAL
tables](https://questdb.io/blog/2021/05/10/questdb-release-6-0-tsbs-benchmark/).
```

Author: done

Looking at how other databases solve the replication problem, we chose our goal
to archive multi-master replication with Async consistency. We believe this
approach strikes the best balance of fault tolerance and transaction throughput.
And it is essential to have a built-in write de-duplication mechanism for
automatic write failover cases. The next steps for QuestDB will be to move the
built-in Sequencer component to a distributed environment and solve WAL sharing
between multiple instances.

Riding tandem bicycles with a friend is the best redundancy solution we see for
QuestDB. And as for my commute problem, well, I still don't know how to solve
it. You are more than welcome to join our (Slack
Community)[https://slack.questdb.io/] and share your feedback. You can also play
with QuestDB (live demo)[https://demo.questdb.io/] or
(play.questdb.io)[https://play.questdb.io/] to see how fast it rides. And, of

> course, open-source contributions to our (project on

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
it. You are more than welcome to join our [Slack
Community](https://slack.questdb.io/) and share your feedback. You can also play
with QuestDB [live demo](https://demo.questdb.io/) or
[play.questdb.io](https://play.questdb.io/) to see how fast it rides. And, of
course, open-source contributions to our [project on
```

Author: done

> GitHub)[https://github.com/questdb/questdb] are more than welcome.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
GitHub](https://github.com/questdb/questdb) are more than welcome.
```

Author: done

but fortunately, they can be executed in parallel without the above error.

ClickHouse also has a useful method to solve lost writing confirmations; in case
an `INSERT` (or other) query confirmation is lost because of a network disconnect

> or timeout, the client resends the whole block of data in the same way

Author: exactly is key here
